You've bought a present for me in this
box and I feel nervous and excited.
>> So, this is a human [music] brain with a
spinal cord. Such a masterpiece. But
what people don't know is that we have
four different structured parts of our
brain that automatically shape how we
think, feel, and behave. But what if
it's not unconscious? What if we could
pick and choose how we want to be in any
moment on purpose? Like we can manifest
our own mental health. And by the end of
this conversation today, you're going to
teach me how to do that.
>> Absolutely. You're going to so get it.
>> Harvard neuroscientist [music] Dr. Jill
Bolty Taylor
>> has transformed how we understand the
brain through her research and own
traumatic experience. She's teaching the
world how to unlock every part of their
brain to regain control of [music] their
thoughts, emotions, and behavior.
>> We have a problem. We are skewed as a
society to the two parts of the left
brain which focuses on me, the
individual. How do I fit myself into a
society? And trauma is living in there
as is cravings and addiction. And we
need this. It [music] protects us. We
get in trouble when this is the only
portion of our brain that we value
because look at the world we currently
live in.
>> So is there a strategy for making sure
that you don't act upon it?
>> Well, so many people are trying to get
rid of their emotional reactivity. But
the way to heal it is not to get rid of
it. I mean, we're wired for this. Why do
I want to just put myself in a little
box and say, "I don't want to have pain.
I don't want to be mad. I want to be a
robot. I don't want to be a robot. I
want to be a whole human with a whole
brain. Like this is life and it lasts
this long and then it's gone. And it
took me losing the left side of my brain
for 8 years to realize just how how
precious this thing is.
>> So how do I control and protect my brain
at all costs?
>> Well, there's a lot. So you ready?
Want some hot stuff?
>> I see messages all the time in the
comment section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way, you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you.
Dr. Jill Balty Taylor, what have you
spent your professional career
endeavoring to understand and why does
it matter?
>> I am fascinated with how does our brain
create our perception of reality and
based on that information what a wonder
it is any two of us can communicate at
all. I think I am fascinated by what we
are as biological creatures. And most of
us are so consumed with everything
outside of ourselves that we have missed
the wonder of what we are as this
biological conglomeration of cells. I
think we're absolutely beautiful. You
know, none of us came into this world
with a road map about how to get it all
right. And the road map is the brain
cells. And when we understand the brain
cells and what they do and how to work
with them and how to keep them well,
then we can manifest our own mental
health.
>> And do you think the average person
understands the brain?
Did you understand the brain before you
started studying it?
>> Well, I understood it because I had a
brother who was diagnosed would be
diagnosed with a brain disorder
schizophrenia. So I became fascinated by
five or six about what are we and why is
he the way he is? We are so different
from one another. Our interpretation of
our experiences are so different from
one another. What's what are we? I just
I just became a philosopher very young
and fascinated with the biology and the
anatomy of what we are. What do you
think an understanding of the brain, the
understanding that you're going to
communicate to myself and my audience
today,
>> how do you think that can help me
improve my life?
>> Oh my goodness. If I understand what
part of me interacts with the external
world and is smart and is good with
details and is well organized, then I
know how to use that part. And that's
this. We are skewed as a society to that
leftinking portion of our brain. In
fact, as far as traditional medicine is
concerned, that thinking portion of our
brain is the only portion that is
actually conscious. So then we live our
lives literally with our left emotional
tissue, our left our right emotional
tissue and our right thinking tissue all
as part of our unconscious brain. But
what if it's not unconscious? What if we
actually know what those groups of cells
also do? So that when I'm experiencing
my pain from the past, I can actually
call on the portion of my brain that
knows how to self soothe me so that I
can lift myself out of my pain, learn
from those experiences, and then live a
more fulfilled life. It's the power to
choose who and how we want to be in the
world when we understand what our
choices are.
>> So is it possible to choose which part
of your brain to use in a certain
moment? Once
>> you do it all the time, you're just
probably not aware of it. Let's say
you're going to have a business call and
uh you got your stats and you got your
data and you pick up the phone and you
say, "Yes, this is Steve and blah blah
blah." And you work into your details
and then let's say uh someone peaks in
to to let's say a little dog comes
running in. Okay. Well, you're going to
have a couple of responses potentially
responses. One, you're going to smile,
right? You just smiled. You just moved
into, "Oh, I love my little fuzzy." And
yeah, okay. Now you know now you're a
little gentler because now you shifted
into a different portion of your brain
that is open to the present moment and
now you just got uplifted. So we have
these four different anatomically
neuroanatomically structured parts of
our brain and we can pick and choose who
and how we want to be in any moment when
we know what our choices are. But we
don't know what our choices are as our
society because we are functioning
skewed to that left thinking portion of
our brain and everything else is running
on automatic.
>> And the left thinking portion of the
brain is the what more logical
>> logical rational analytical likes to
control people's places. There's a me uh
definition ego center of I exist. I am
Joe Bolty Taylor. This is my phone
number. This is where I live. I know
that this is where I begin and end,
where my skin meets air because a group
of cells tells me where I begin and end.
But you've probably had flow moments
where you were doing your sports or you
were making love or you were whatever
you were doing and and you didn't begin
and end here. You were vast and open and
you were this big energy ball that you
are. But the left hemisphere focuses on
that little group of cells and those
skill sets and the right and the wrong
and the good and bad and that that
portion of the brain defines the social
norm. And we all have to fit ourselves
in the social norm. But it's only a
quarter of our brain.
>> Is it making us unhappy the way that we
use our brain currently?
>> Well, we're out of balance. We're
completely out of balance because we're
at the balance of the value of that left
brain. What's going on in the right
brain? The right brain is right here
right now. We spend so much of our time.
So fundamental differences between the
right hemisphere and the left
hemisphere. And I know this only because
I lost my left hemisphere and that's all
I had for eight years. I had to use what
I had currently going on in my right
hemisphere after I lost those cells of
the left hemisphere in order to rebuild
the skill sets of the left brain so that
I could become completely functional
again. Are we unhappy? Well, that's not
a happy part of the brain. When you're
being analytical and organized and
structured, you probably got that that
burr that frown right there. You know,
you're and and it's a different
expression. Then as soon as, as I said,
a little puppy comes in and then all of
a sudden your face happens. Well, what
happens is you're shifting into a
different part of your brain. And that's
what we do. We're running it on
automatic. So, if we are running our
brain on automatic, imagine how much
better we might do if we were actually
picking and choosing who and how we
wanted to be on purpose.
>> And you're telling me that's possible.
>> Absolutely.
>> And by the end of this conversation
today, you're going to teach me how to
do that.
>> Absolutely. You're going to so get it.
And it will. And once you see you, you
will no longer ever not see you. And
then you're going to see these four
characters inside of yourself. And now
you're going to be looking at your
partner who you speak about often. And
you're going to be going, "Oh yeah, I
recognize all four parts of her, too."
But what that means is that any
relationship that we have, there's eight
of us. There's eight of us. Eight very
specific personalities
in every relationship. So I have four
very predictable character profiles, as
do you. It's the way the anatomy of the
brain is built.
>> You've bought a present for me in this
box.
>> I did.
>> What is in that box? This is a very
special brain with a spinal cord.
>> This is a real brain with
>> This is a real brain with a spinal cord.
>> A real spinal cord. A
>> And do you own this brain?
>> This I did this dissection and uh yes,
this brain was specifically donated to
me for educational purposes.
>> How old was the person? What was
>> in their 40s?
>> Do you know how they passed away?
>> Brain cancer.
>> And can you see the brain cancer?
>> You cannot. Not until I cut this open.
And I've had this brain for over a
decade and I haven't cut it open. It is
very rare to have an dissection which is
actually brain and spinal cord. Usually
you dissect the brain and we learn about
the brain but I wanted to have the brain
and spinal cord because that's the
central nervous system and it's a
spectacular dissection.
>> Um I feel nervous and excited.
>> Excited is good. I'm excited
>> cuz you're right here right now going,
"Oh my gosh, something new."
>> Yeah,
>> it's exciting. Right here, right now is
an exciting time. Are you ready?
>> I am ready.
>> Okay.
>> Should I put my gloves on?
>> I encourage you to do so. Okay.
So, this is a real human brain. And
right now, it is um hydrated in rubbing
alcohol. So, that's what this is.
So, you don't have to be afraid of that.
So, this is a real human brain
and spinal cord.
And I think what I'll do is I'll just
move this over here.
>> Yeah.
>> Out of the way. Okay. So, this is a
human brain.
>> What's that skin on the top of it
>> with a spinal cord?
>> This thing here.
>> We'll get there.
>> Oh.
>> So, you've heard about menitis.
>> Yeah. It's layers that support between
the bone and the brain tissue and it
protects it. So this is called these
there are three layers called the
meninges. So when you've heard of
menitis. So this is the dura mater. It's
very tough and you'll feel that. It's
like a really tough lettuce. And this is
is essentially strapping the brain into
the cranial vault and holding it into
position because you don't want this
thing flopping around and having
wounding and uh injury.
>> So it it straps it into here.
>> It well it straps it in certain spots.
Yes. And generally often when you do a
dissection, you actually have to uh put
a like screwdriver in there to peel the
dura off the bone. So it straps it into
position. It's kind of like a bra for
the brain.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. So this is the dura and then what
I'm touching now is called the arachnoid
and that's the second layer of the
meningis. And what you're looking at in
there is blood is blood inside of the
blood vessels. So one of the things
about why the brain is so fragile is the
blood vessels are transparently thin.
>> So the pressurized system of what's
going on inside of the cranial vault has
to be highly regulated. And it's
actually the pressure of the cranial
vault versus the pressure in the thorax
of the chest and the pressure of the
abdomen. It's a system and they all work
together in order to to keep everything
well regulated homeostasis a state where
the cells are happy and so the third
layer is like right here and it's you
can see this layer is peeled away the
arachnoid and under here I'm now
touching pia and pia is the external
layer of the brains brain cells
themselves the brain tissue so so this
is a beautiful brain and it would be
positioned in my head like this.
So front of the brain, back of the brain
coming down, hanging down as the spinal
cord. And then as you look at the spinal
cord, this is called the cottoina or
cotquina. And these are the nerves that
are actually going to go down into your
lower extremity. So all the information
that's going to go down into your lower
extremity to control your body is
controlled and the sensory information
is coming in through those nerve fibers.
>> Looks like a bunch of wise.
>> It does. Well, you know, we are quite a
welldesigned machine in its own way. It
a difference is we are organic. We are
biological. And I think one of the
biggest mistakes that we make as a
society is we think ourselves and we
think ourselves as a machine. Push it,
push it, push it, push it, push it, push
it, push it. Well, you can do that with
a computer. You plug it in and it stays
on until you turn it off or it blows up.
We have to go to sleep. Yeah. Have a
good time with that.
>> Yes.
It's okay. We won't hurt it.
>> Wow.
>> We hope. Gosh.
>> Uhhuh.
Beautiful.
Our design such a masterpiece. We are
this massive conglomeration of 50
trillion molecular geniuses making up
our form.
Beautiful.
>> It's so crazy that every single person
listening right now has one of these
processing my voice as you're hearing my
voice. That's right. And it is this, for
anyone that has never felt a brain
before, which I imagine is most of you,
it is like this very, very soft but
dense sort of tofuy.
How would you describe the feeling?
>> Pork roast.
>> It's very soft though. Do you know what?
It makes me It makes me realize
>> Yes.
>> how easy this would be to damage. Now,
this has been in alcohol or from
aldahhide for since at least 2008,
probably earlier. And when you first
pull a brain out, it's even softer. It's
like a it's like a tough jelly. So that
when you first bring out a fresh brain,
if you take your finger and you just
poke it into the tissue, it'll squeeze
right in and then you pull your finger
out and then it goes it'll scrunch right
back together again.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Yeah. So, so this is a prepared specimen
and and we have to do that and and lock
together the proteins or the lipids in
order for us to be able to handle it for
educational purposes.
>> So, this is the computer and then this
is the wires that control the rest of
the body. Well, it's part of the system
because um this this what you're holding
is the central nervous system and then
the central all of it and then the
central nervous system sends u between
each of the vertebrae. Here you have
different vertebrae between different
vertebrae. You will have different
nerves coming out and then going around
the body. And then you're also going to
have vagus nerves coming off of the
brain stem area and going down into the
abdomen taking care of the visca.
>> The first time you saw a brain like
this,
>> how did it change your perspective of
life?
>> I love it. I love it. I was I was very
blessed to have an aunt who was a
debutant back in the years where
debutants did not get jobs and she
wanted to be an emergency room uh doctor
but there was no way that she was going
to do that. So she would actually
encourage me to pick up roadkill and we
would take it home and dissect it. It's
beautiful. See that look? We have two
responses. The left brain says, "Oh my
gosh, this is disgusting. This is the
worst thing I ever had." And that's a
part of your brain that's designed to
kind of critically judge and say, "No,
it's not safe. It's not cool. Push it
away." But the right hemisphere comes
online with curiosity. So people see
these things and they go, "Oh, no, not
my thing." Or they go, "Oh my gosh, that
is like so cool."
>> I feel both at the same time. I feel I
feel um
>> I have like almost a respect for the
person.
>> Yes. who grew the brain, whose brain
that [clears throat] belongs to
>> and then the other part of me is just
like totally fascinated and it almost
you know when you look at it you go you
you still don't realize that you have
one of those in your head.
>> I still don't.
>> Now so you you're still looking at that
as that's a one thing. I don't look at
it like that at all. This is a brain.
But what's important about this brain is
our brain health, our brain abilities is
100 dependent on the cells that make up
that brain. So most people, many
neuroscientists talk about the brain and
how the brain does in the external world
and the behavior and the
neurotransmitter systems and all of
that. I go down to the raw data of the
cells. So, I am a cellular
neuroanatomist and so I care about the
cells making up the nervous system and
how do we how do we interact with them?
How do we relate to them? How do we care
for them? How do we feed them? How do we
provide for them so that they can be
healthy so that I can live a whole brain
life in a healthy way?
>> For context, where did you do your PhD?
You did your PhD in neur neuron anatomy
at Indiana State University.
>> Indiana State. And my research was at
the IU School of Medicine, Indiana
University School of Medicine. So that's
where I focused on neuro.
>> Yeah.
>> And uh then from there I went to Harvard
Medical School.
>> Yeah.
>> And uh did two postocs, one in
neurobiology and then one in psychiatry.
>> And when I say the 10th of December,
>> yes,
>> 1996.
>> Yes.
>> Which was [snorts and sighs]
4 years after I was born roughly.
>> Mhm.
>> You're 37 years old.
>> Yes.
What happened on that day? Can you give
me a playbyplay?
>> Yes. Well, the day before that I was
teaching and performing research at
Harvard Medical School and I am a gross
anatomist which means cadaver entire
body as well as hisytologology which is
tissue as well as neuro. So I am all
about anatomy. So I teaching and
performing research at Harvard Medical
School. And uh I woke up the next day
and I was experiencing a major
hemorrhage in the left half of my brain.
So I woke up, I sat up and I immediately
had a pulsing pound behind my left eye
and uh generally I didn't have that and
it was pretty severe and it got all of
my attention and I have my before and
after is before and after that morning.
>> What happens next? So, you've got a
pulsing pain be behind your left eye.
What did you do then?
>> Well, I thought, "Wow, that's weird."
And it was the costic pain that you get
when you bite into ice cream. It's like
that freeze brain.
>> Uh, and I thought, uh, okay. And I felt,
uh, I felt suddenly weak. And, um, and I
thought, okay. So, I got up and light
was, um, kind of burning on my eyes. It
was I didn't want light in the morning
that day. So, I closed the curtains and
I thought, well, let's get my blood
flowing. Maybe I'll feel a little
better. So, I jumped onto my cardio
glider, which was a whole body full
exercise machine. But I'm looking at my
hands and realizing that my hands look
like primitive claws, grasping onto the
bar, and I look at my body and I'm
thinking, "Whoa, I'm a weird looking
thing." and my perception of reality
shifted away from my perception of being
the one on the machine having my normal
morning experience to wow I was
witnessing myself having this experience
and I'd never had that happen before and
I thought okay so this isn't helping so
I get off the machine and I uh head
across my living room table and I'm
realizing Every movement is very rigid
and very precise and I'm actually kind
of directing. I felt very robotic
getting into the bathroom. So I remember
pulling on the water and when the water
came out, it smashed into the tub and
the volume just reverberated in my
brain. It was so loud the sound was
amplified and it pushed me against the
wall. But when the volume hit, I'm a
neuroanatomist. So what that means is
that I'm teaching students about all of
the anatomy here and which fibers are
coming in and going where and what is
the tracks of everything. And so sound
comes into the ears and it goes right
down to the pawns region of our brain
down here. And this is where life and
death is. This is where those cells, if
you're going to inspire, you need your
pounds and and your your medulla in
order to have those [clears throat]
cells functioning. So, when mine went
were being disturbed, that was the
moment I realized I've got a problem.
This is a grave problem. Uh, this could
kill me. So, I got out of the shower. I
dressed mechanically, just dressed. I'm
still going to work. And then my right
arm went totally paralyzed by my side.
And and it's really strange when a limb
goes paralyzed. It doesn't just like
drop down. It goes bomb. I mean, it's a
heavy entity. And I thought, "Oh my
gosh, paralysis. Oh my gosh, I'm having
a stroke." And then I'm thinking, "Okay,
you know, oh my gosh, how many brain
scientists have the opportunity to study
their own brain from the inside out?"
And I literally thought, "Okay, I'll do
this stroke thing for a week or two and
then I'll get back to my job." Right? So
then it was a matter of I have to get
help. I have to communicate with the
external world. And a problem was that
the hemorrhage was happening inside of
the left thinking portion of my brain
which is where language is. So I was
drifting for 4 hours. I was drifting in
and out of the consciousness of the
present moment. And the present moment
the pres in in the present moment I
don't know who I am. I don't know what I
am. All I can know is what's in the
present moment.
>> So explain that for me. So yeah,
>> the left side of your brain
>> was where the stroke was happening.
>> Yes, it was.
>> So you were in the right side of your
brain.
>> I was waffling back and forth because it
was growing. It started small. So I had
what we call an arteriovenus malf for an
artery which is a high pressure system.
It's bringing blood into the system. And
then I have a vein and the vein is a no
pressure, low pressure system. And then
we have these little capillary networks
in between.
Yeah, this is an es schemic stroke. I
had the the uh the hemorrhagic stroke.
So when you think about stroke, most
people think, oh, blood clot
>> and the blood clot blocks a So the thing
about um arteries is they taper taper
taper taper taper until they get down to
the capillary level, which is where the
blood uh the red blood cells kind of
line up in single file and pass through
that. And it's a very low pressure
system, and then it absorbs back up into
the vein. Well, what I had was the
hemorrhagic stroke and a blood vessel
exploded. And when it exploded, then the
blood goes out into the extracellular
matrix, which is extracellular between
the cells and the cells cannot function.
Blood is essentially poison to cellular
communication. So, it's no good. And
whatever blood wherever it goes, those
cells start going offline. And then as
that uh hemorrhage grows inside of the
brain across time, more and more cells
are becoming incapacitated.
>> So you were in that moment unable to
remember how to speak properly, unable
to
>> nothing. I had nothing. I didn't even
have me. I had no Jill Bolty Taylor
because she was over in the left
hemisphere. And eventually that whole
hemisphere ended up swimming in a pool
of blood and was nonfunctional. But it
took four hours to get there. So, I was
waffling into the present moment,
blissful euphoria. I didn't exist. I h I
know who I am and that I exist at all
because I have a tiny little group of
cells inside of my left hemisphere that
tells me who I am. Have you ever
awakened in a hotel somewhere because
you've traveled so much and you're
going, "Where am I?"
>> Yeah.
>> There's this blank, right? And it's
like, "I don't know, but the bed's
comfy." You know, what a nice room. you
know, and all of a sudden you're just
right here, right now, and you're not
about the past, and you're not about the
future, and you're just in the present
moment. And joy lives in the present
moment. Love lives in the present
moment. Laughter lives in the present
moment. The present moment is a
fantastic place. And we are wired to
that by literally half our brain.
So why wouldn't we spend more time over
here
or at least balance it out? That's all I
ever ask for. I am not here to uh uh you
know uh as a waving the flag of the re
of the right hemisphere. I want whole
brain living. I want people to
understand the different parts of their
brain what they do so that it says okay
so let's say do you meditate
>> sometimes.
>> Okay sometimes. What's it like for you?
>> Difficult.
>> Okay. Why?
>> Because the you start thinking about
stuff.
>> Okay. Because this part of your brain
won't be quiet.
>> The left is that that's
>> left thinking brain. We're languages. it
won't be quiet. Or uh you just had a
little argument with your with your
sweetheart and so down here now you're
in your emotional system and you're not
really feeling peaceful and you got on
that airplane and things weren't like
perfectly smooth. So now you're kind of,
you know, ruminating about, you know, oh
my gosh, oh my gosh, oh my gosh, you
know, and whatever. And that takes you
away from the present moment. But the
present moment
is it's not about me, the individual. I
think about this the the so I look at
the brain it's divided into four
categories very specific anatomically
each one of those result in a
constellation of skill sets and then
that constellation of skill sets
actually manifests in our lives as
personalities and we all have all four
now do we all practice all four
of us do we usually have a dominant you
seem to like your left thinking brain a
lot. When do you have fun? What does
Steve do for fun?
>> This.
>> This?
>> No. Also, I watch I watch Manchester
United play and I
>> You lift weights.
>> Yeah.
>> What's that like for you? Is it work or
is it refreshing to be in your body?
>> Oh, when I'm at the gym, it's Yeah, it's
I'm just in my body, which is Yeah.
>> Okay. But no, not just But when you're
at the gym, you're in your body. Now,
can you go back in your own mind and
have that feeling?
>> Can I?
>> Yes.
>> How?
>> Well, go there in your mind.
>> I actually imagined myself on the
treadmill at my favorite gym and how
that felt. And I had a brief moment of
that feeling emerge in my mind.
>> And what did it feel like?
>> Present.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. And any other emotions that you
can attach to it?
>> Just like calm, peaceful, without
without concern. Very present.
>> Yeah.
>> Very present.
>> Yeah. So the present is a nice place for
you.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. What else do you do to get
there?
>> Massages.
>> Massages. You receive massages. Okay.
>> Okay. And what happens to your brain? Do
you analyze what's coming and just work
your butt off? Or do you allow yourself
to actually drift and shift into the
present moment of, "Oh my gosh, I'm so
glad I'm here."
>> I allow myself to drift.
>> Good. Where do you go?
>> I don't know. It's like a fuzzy.
>> Yes.
>> Middle ground place.
>> Yes. No boundaries.
>> Some kind of limbo.
>> This portion of the brain up here is
going to be the part that says who you
are as an individual. It's your ego
center. This hemisphere, the left
hemisphere, has the picture of nature
with you in the middle because you exist
in your left hemisphere.
>> That's where the the world revolves
around you.
>> The world revolves around you. In the
right hemisphere, you don't even exist.
You exist as a part of it all. So what
you hear gets integrated with what you
smell, with what you feel, gets
integrated in the excitement of
possibility. So, I'm not working from a
plan. I'm not in the past. I'm not in
the future. I'm not all about me. I'm
just here. So, when you're on a table,
massage table, and you're allowing
yourself to go fuzzy,
that's essentially the skill set of
what's going on in the right hemisphere.
When you dive into water, you swim.
>> Uh, not not not well.
>> Okay. But do you dive into water? I do.
Yeah.
>> Okay. Or even just in the shower. When
you feel when you dive into water and
you feel the water, the pressure against
your body, the temperature of the wa of
the water, you feel the phenomenon of
wetness. This is a present moment
experiential opportunity diving into the
water. Now, a lot of people might dive
in the water because I'm racing and the
whole goal is to get to the end because
I got that left brain thing going on and
it's that's the goal. But if I'm just
being, this is, you know, are you being
or are you doing, right? When we're
being, we're simply being here. We're
being alive. We're being aware. We're
being in experience. So, as I take in
this room, I take in this whole room. My
left brain says, "I'm going to focus on
you, and I got these books, and I've got
these things, and I got the brains, and
everything, and everything's a thing."
But to the right brain, everything is
one thing. And when I live my life
knowing that I can shift out of the
stress circuitry of that left brain that
says more cortisol, more cortisol, do do
then when I it's the it's the that's the
push. The right brain is the pause. And
that's why I was saying before, we're
not a robot. We're not a computer. We
are a biological organism. And so we
don't plug ourselves in and turn it on
and it stays on and forever until it
dies and then we buy a new one. We have
rhythms. We have natural patterns and we
have to push and we have to pause and we
have to pause because we are 50 trillion
molecular geniuses that are eating and
creating waste and we need to clean up
the mess and that's what happens during
sleep.
>> And so when you were stood there you'd
put your clothes on the left side of
your brain was offline. So you were very
much in this sort of blissful, euphoric,
present moment state. What did you do
next?
>> I I go through all the details of trying
to get myself help. And that meant to me
the one plan I could get between
shifting black back out into the
euphoria of my right hemisphere where
I'm just in bliss. I'm just happy. I'm
just there and I don't have a plan.
>> Why didn't you call 911?
>> Because it was just floating in a pool
of blood. It wasn't there for me.
>> What do you mean? Well, when you look at
where my hemorrhage happened, it
happened. So, so language, the creation
of sound and language, dog, dog is a
sound. It's going to come out of uh
Broca's area. And then Waricki's area
back here is going to place meaning on
that sound. And my hemorrhage was
impacting this whole area. And in there
with language is numbers. 911 didn't
exist for me. Was not an option. you can
remember 911
>> didn't exist for me. It'd be kind of
like I say to you, um uh what's 8,322*
4 million?
It doesn't exist for you until you
figure it out.
>> 164,374.
I'm checking [laughter]
>> exactly. So 911 didn't exist for me. So
I had to when I would come back into the
left hemisphere consciousness, then I
would I got to my phone and I put have a
phone pad here and I spent 45 minutes
waffling in and out right hemisphere,
left hemisphere and finally I found my
business card that had my phone number
of work and I had to set the pad of the
phone pad up against right next to the
business card and match the shapes, the
squiggles in order to figure out how to
call my office because I had no idea
what numbers were.
>> And what did you say when the person
answered on the other end?
>> I said, "This is Jill. I need help." And
what came out of my mouth was.
And then I thought, "Oh my god, I sound
like a golden retriever." And then he
spoke to me and I thought, "Oh my god,
he sounds like a golden retriever." I
had had a golden retriever and they're
very verbal.
So I knew at that point I did not know
because I could still hear myself my
language inside of my brain language is
very complex in this because different
cells do different things and in this
this left thinking portion we can read
we can write those are completely
different circuitries we can speak we
can comprehend when others speak I mean
it's complex so this is a busy busy busy
place but as long as this is the only
portion of our brain bra that we value.
Then we live based on the values of that
portion of the brain. And what that
brain values is me and mine and I want
more. And that's the world we're living
in.
>> It's selfish. Well, it certainly is
>> because people talk about there being a
spiritual crisis in society at the
moment with many of the things you're
describing, the individualism, the
narcissism, sociopathism, the leaders of
the world being very
>> uh zero sum and how they approach
>> Yeah.
>> economies and how they treat others.
>> You're saying that's because we're so
>> right there over here
>> on the right side.
>> On the right side, it's right here right
now. And in the right here, right now,
what do I care about? I care about
connection because I'm not
individualized here. I'm a part of the
whole. I am. We are all standing around
this beautiful planet. And I, man, is
equal to all the other creatures and all
the other life and to the life of the
planet. We are one construct here. And
we either figure out how to nurture and
support and be one thing. We are one
human family in our right hemisphere.
You are my brother. I love you. I can
support you. I can nurture you. I can
encourage you because you're a part of
me. And then the left hemisphere comes
online and says, "Oh, Jill, that is so
inappropriate for you to say."
and he has his body space and I have my
body space and we need to be formal and
we need to right and wrong and good and
bad and we need to establish how the
construct of the social norm is that we
are now going to take the mass of all
that we are and fit ourselves in that so
that we can communicate with one another
and run a world
>> you make that phone call
>> you you sound like a golden retriever um
what happens next does your colleague
get
>> he recognizes it is me it is I and he
comes to my home and back in those days
we had a managed care so you have to go
to the right place or you don't get
coverage. So he took me there and then
they took a picture of my brain and then
they they put me in an ambulance and
sent me to Mass General Hospital and as
and I'm still curled up in a little
fetal ball going hold on hold on and I
was slowing down and I knew that I was
becoming weaker and weaker and I
wondered how detached from my own
ability my own body can a person become
before they can never get back inside
this tiny little body because I felt
that I was literally energetically as
big as the universe.
And what did that scan show? It showed a
a
>> major hemorrhage in the left half of the
brain. Yeah, about that size. Actually,
it was a little bigger than that on that
on that day. Uh but by the two and a
half weeks later when they removed uh
that's why we have a golf ball a golf
ballized blood clot from the left half
of my brain. Two and a half weeks later,
December 27.
And then I woke up and I had this huge
hemorrhage. I I mean I had this huge
scar, but my mother comes rushing in and
she says, "Speak to me. Speak to me
because this is my language. If my
language cells are gone, I will have no
language and I will struggle the rest of
my life for language." And I I whispered
to her, "I'm better. I'm better." And
what I meant by I'm better was that I
felt bright again. I felt bright. I felt
like whatever life was going to give me
at that point in time, I had brightness.
I was still alive. I did not die that
day. And when, you know, so many people
have said, "How what motivated you to
get better or or how can you could you
have been so happy?" And it was like I
did not die that day. And that meant no
matter how disabled I was, I could not
walk, talk, read, write, recall any of
my life. I became an infant in a woman's
body at the age of 37. I completely fell
off the Harvard ladder and none of that
mattered. All that mattered was I was
alive. And what that meant was I had the
potential to grow and heal and become
whatever I would become. And it didn't
matter. And it still doesn't matter.
What matters is I'm alive. It's the gift
of life. And that's for me the wonder of
what we are as living beings. And we,
you know, we are at a time where we are
in a mental health crisis. And our
mental health is 100% dependent on the
health and well-being of the brain and
the health and well-being of the brain
is 100% dependent on the health and the
well-being of the brain cells. So how do
we nurture those cells and love those
cells so that we can live the life we
want to live and we can live in joy. We
can live in present. We can live feeling
connected to something that is is
magnificent as a life force power of the
universe and have this magnificent left
brain that allows me to have language
allows me to be a part of society in an
effective way and allows me to have pain
from my past so I can learn and grow
from experiences that have happened to
me that I would rather not repeat.
>> What is the complex range of emotions
you're experiencing as you recount the
story?
Oh, I feel such awe for life. Life. This
is life. This is life and there is
death. And we have life. And life is the
miracle construction of the universe.
Argue about it all you want. Have a
million conversations about it. Analyze
it to death. But the fact of the matter
is you are alive in this moment. You are
alive. You can say you have eyes that
can see and ears that can hear. And you
have a digestive tract that can bring in
nutrition and you have manual dexterity
and you have mobility. You have legs
that can run around the planet and you
have this magnificent mind so that you
can do what you want to do. You are a
miracle and we have forgotten that. And
for me, it took me, this whole stroke
experience took me straight back to the
part of my brain, that right thinking
part that connects me in that
transformation or that trans
transcendence experience of being so
much more than just a little human being
running around the planet. Oh my gosh,
life is this miracle.
And it makes me feel awe and wonder. It
excites me so much. If everybody had
that and recognize that and could grasp
that and hold that, imagine the
different world we'd be living in.
>> Eight years.
>> Eight years
>> of recovery.
>> Yes.
every day, every breath, every
everything I thought of nothing else
other than what can I do and what's in
the way of being able to do what I want
to do next and rebuilding using what I
had in the right hemisphere to rebuild
the circuits. I knew I had language. I
knew I could speak. I knew I had
vocabulary. I knew I had ideas. I knew
somewhere in there I had numbers. It
took eight. It took four years for me to
uneven understand what's a one.
I mean, wow.
Wow. I did not die that day. I did not
die that day. And so, I have all the
possibility of what will be. And it was
wide open. I wasn't going to be a
neuroscientist again because that left
hemisphere. I never held myself to
returning to whom I had been before the
stroke. That girl died that day as far
as I was concerned. But the phenomenon
was that as I'm a gross anatomist so I
taught K cadaavver lab and when you are
teaching you have a whole body there and
you're teaching medical students about
what's inside of there. You get your
hands in there and you say, "I want you
to slip in behind the stomach and I want
you to slip this hand in here and I want
you to know the relationship between the
stomach and the deadum and the liver and
and the splenic nerve and the kidney. I
want you to feel it because I want you
to have a three-dimensional image of
that inside of your mind so that you can
use that information."
Very rightrained. So when we learn, we
learn facts and details with the left
brain, but we learn context and big
picture with the right brain. So we have
these two very different ways of working
it out.
I've had so many founders speak to me
and say, "Why didn't this particular ad
that I ran on this platform work for
me?" Maybe the copy wasn't good, the
creative wasn't strong, but usually the
problem is they're not having the right
conversation because that ad never
reached the right person. And if you're
in B2B marketing, that is much of the
game. And this is where LinkedIn ads
solves that problem for you. Their
targeting is ridiculously specific. You
can target by job title, seniority,
company size, industry, and even
someone's skill set. And their network
includes over a billion professionals.
About 130 million of them are decision
makers. So when you use LinkedIn ads,
you're putting your brand in front of
the right people. And LinkedIn ads also
drive the highest B2B return on ad spend
across all ad networks in my experience.
If you want to give them a try, head
over to linkedin.com/diary.
And when you spend $250 on your first
LinkedIn ads campaign, you'll get an
extra $250 credit from me for the next
one. That's linkedin.com/diary.
Terms and conditions apply.
>> So, you said there's four personalities
in everybody's brain.
>> What are those four personalities? As
we're looking at the brain, just from an
anatomical perspective,
the way evolution happens for the
mamalian brain is that there are
creatures who have a spinal cord and
they have and then and there are
creatures like that like worms and then
a little brain, a little medulla will
form at the top of that tissue and then
now that brain controls and streamlines
information processing to the rest of
the system and Then we add a pawns.
What's that?
>> It's just a structure of cells. So this
is the medulla.
>> Yeah,
>> we would have spinal cord there. And
this is the pawns. Call that the pawns.
It's a group of cells. Yeah. It's a
smaller brain. [snorts] And in
relationship to that pawns is this
cerebellum. And the cerebellum has this
gorgeous cell in it called the perkenji
cell. And they're they're like a hand.
They're like, you know, two-dimensional.
And they all line up like this. And then
fibers run through those.
And it's part of the mechanism of timing
so that you have fluidity of movement
because of the way those cells are
aligned. So not all cells are created
equal and not all cells look alike.
Cells have the right shape for the right
job. So as then we we grow and now we
have the mamalian brain. We're going to
have the hippocampus. You've heard of
that for learning and memory. The
amygdala, you've heard that for am I
safe?
>> Am I safe?
>> Are you safe? the amydala. Yeah, the
there's a group of cells right there
that is scanning constantly. Am I safe?
Am I safe? Am I safe? And you're fine
until you're not safe.
>> Okay. So, like threat detection.
>> Yes, that's exactly what it is. You have
two emotional systems.
>> One in your left hemisphere and one in
your right hemisphere. And the right
hemisphere is going to be right here
right now. Am I safe in the right here
right now? So, let's say all of a sudden
a snake ro went by and we would jump. we
would startle because it's your right
amydala saying, "Oh my gosh, am I safe?"
And then the left hemisphere is going,
"Oh my gosh, it's a snake. No, I'm not
safe. Push it away."
>> And when we're calm, that's when the
hippocampi, because we have two amydala,
one in each hemisphere, two hippocampi,
one in each hemisphere. And when the
amygdala are calm and you feel safe, now
you can learn and focus, focus with the
anter with the singular gyrus and learn
new things. So, so you know these groups
of cells. Now, if you wipe out an
amydala, you're not going to feel any
fear. You wipe out a language center,
you're not going to have any language.
You wipe out motor skills to your index
finger and you can't, you're paralyzed.
So, every ability you have is because we
have these brain cells that perform that
function.
So, for the four parts of us, so we have
an emotional system in each hemisphere.
The emotional system of the right
hemisphere. This is a right here, right
now machine. Right here, right now.
That's all it has. Doesn't have the
past. Doesn't have the future. Doesn't
know who you are.
>> Doesn't have anxiety, depression.
>> Well, it has anxiety,
but most of that is going to be based in
the left hemisphere because this
machine, the left hemisphere, has
linearity across time. So, this
emotional system is remembering every
traumatic event that ever happened to
you that you don't want to have happen
again. Is that where trauma lives in the
brain?
>> Trauma is living in there as is
addiction. Addiction, there's a group of
cells in here called the insular cortex
and that's where craving is and that's a
part of the lyic system of the left
hemisphere. And if you wipe out craving,
do you still have an addiction? So this
is so so let me just keep going. So we
have these two emotional systems and
then we have these two thinking systems.
And the thinking system is what
distinguish us as humans from all other
mammals. Okay? So our mammals, our dogs
love us. There isn't any question about
that. Our dogs can punish us when we're
not very, you know, we don't show up and
we've sent them to doggy care if they're
not happy about that. So mammals have
other forms, but we have this higher
executive functioning. And in the right
hemisphere, it's right here right now.
And in the left hemisphere, it's all
about me. Because in there in that
thinking is my ego center in that
preffrontal region. I me I exist back
here orientation association area. I
begin and I end here. This is the
package of me the individual. I have a
language. I can create language. I can
understand language. I can read. I can
write. I have mathematics in there. And
this motor system controls the opposite
side of my body. So that's a
personality. So what are the to
summarize then what are the four types
on
>> okay so I when I look at a brain and
this is totally randomly named um and I
did that because I had to communicate
about it somewhere so I call left
thinking character one and I actually
give that part of my brain a name I call
her Helen hell on wheels she gets it
done you're talking to Helen right now
she's giving you facts and details she
is all about what is right and wrong and
good and bad how do I fit myself into a
society how do I use my words in order
to communicate
So this is the part of us that goes to
work. It's our A type personality.
Character one left thinking
>> and that's that's on this side here.
>> Yeah. Well, it's all it's it's this
outer this outer layer of cells is
called the cerebral cortex. And the
cerebral cortex is actually in human
made up of mostly six layers of cells.
It's very complex. In some areas,
especially where you have uh sensory
systems, it's just going to be four
layers. But this is a complex portion of
the organ that separates us from other
animals.
>> What about character 2?
>> So character 2 is going to be the left
emotion. Now the difference between the
the the things you can say predictably
about the left hemisphere is it has
linearity across time and it has me the
individual and my emotional system then
has my past pain and it wants and and
it's kind of always looking for a reason
to knee-jerk react and have emotional
reactivity. So so many people are trying
to fix or heal or get rid of their
emotional reactivity when re this is a
portion of our brain which is running
constantly in the background to protect
us from in the present moment when new
information comes in. So we want to work
with that and we want to appreciate it
and we want to love on it and we want to
be kind to it because it's generally not
very happy because it is storing all of
our pain from the past.
>> And would you call that
>> character two? I call mine Abby. We
could spend a whole
semester talking about character two
because character two is our pain from
the past and in our society everything's
about our pain from the past and our
professional self. Character three is
going to be the emotional content of the
right hemisphere. Well, this is right
here right now. What am I experiencing
emotionally? Experiential. This is where
what's the temperature of the air? What
does it feel like to have clothing on?
What does that feel like on your body
>> when when you meditate? They ask you to
be become aware of your environment,
right?
>> And focus on your breath. Exactly.
Because because they want you to expand
yourself one out of the thinking
consciousness and right and wrong and
good and bad structure, the box that we
think in of the left thinking and they
want you to stop, you know, thinking
about your girlfriend and boy, we didn't
really end it very well or boy, I had a
great morning this morning. Okay. So, so
this is playful. So, character three,
it's young. We have two little people
inside of ourselves and that's the
emotional. They're immature. We are
feeling creatures as biological
creatures. We are feeling creatures who
think. So a lot of character 3es
actually we have character 3 moments
that land us in jail because it's not
thinking about consequences of behavior.
It's just thinking, "Oh yeah, the
neighbor's pool. It's 3:00 in the
morning. They won't notice. Let's go
jump in their pool." And then the next
thing we know, you know, we've been
arrested. So then character four is the
thinking portion of our brain. This is
our w this is our wisdom. We we go and
we have experiences and we learn because
neuroplasticity is real and every we
have to have neuroplasticity these and
this is all about the cells neurons in
real time reaching out making new
connections constantly but their cell
bodies are in position but in order for
me to make an association between you
and something else then I actually grow
to you and I grow to the something else
and then I learn about that. So our
capacity to learn is what neur is the
underlying feature is neuroplasticity. I
would not be sitting here talking to you
today if neuroplasticity didn't turn on
fire when I needed it for eight years
and it took eight years for me to use
what I had in this brain to rebuild the
skill sets of this brain. But the
thinking portion, the character 4
portion of our brain is the wisdom that
we gain from the knowledge that we have
had and we have associated it and we can
relate to it. And this part all it cares
about is that emotion that I felt that
morning which was all all that I'm
allowed alive at all. And when we can
connect to that people, people people,
you know, it's billiondoll industry of
meditation to quiet what's going on in
the left hemisphere so that we can open
up the possibility to what's going on in
the right hemisphere. And and it's it's
our peace. We are wired at the core of
our being of our right thinking tissue
to feel peace. And we do not exist in a
world that is peaceful. So if we are
functioning on an extreme left brain
left thinking and we are emotionally
volatile when people insult us and we're
all about the me me and we have
forgotten about the we look at the world
we currently live in. And right now we
are so skewed to me the individual and I
want more and I'm against you because
you're not a part of my tribe.
And we balance that by knowing that I'm
alive. It is this incredibly precious
gift. The odds that I had to beat just
to be here. Have you ever stopped to
think about the odds you had to beat
just to be here? Think about this now.
First of all, think about this. The
little egg cell that would evolve into
you eventually, it took form. It's about
the size of of uh you know, it's an egg
cell. It's tiny, but it took form during
your mother's fifth week of gestation.
So, your mother your your grandmother's
pregnant, right? And that little egg
cell that would be your mother has now
made it into the womb. And during the
fifth week of being there, the little
egg cell that would grow into you took
form. It differentiated into the OAM.
And so you, the little egg cell, witness
the next eight months of your mother's
gestation, your mother's birth, your
mother's screaming, your mother's
toddler years, your mother's learning to
sing and laugh and play and learn
geography and mathematics all the way
through her puberty. And then so she's
born with some 400,000 egg cells in her
of two ovaries. And out of those 400,000
egg cells, approximately 500 of those
egg cells are going to be the next
follicular eruption month by month by
month with her period. And your little
egg cell, imagine you're hanging out in
your little ovarian follicle and it's
your turn and you're getting all prepped
by the hormones of the body and you're
going, "Oh my god, it's my ride." Right?
and you're this little egg cell and then
the hormones swoop by your little egg
cell and it beams you out and the
fimbria the fallopian tubes gather you
up and you begin your prominade your
fallopian prominade on the way road to
your mother's sacred womb and in that
moment
your father was there for you and you
were one of the lucky ones and you beat
the odds of all those egg cells you beat
the odds and How can that not be
something that we celebrate the wonder
of the odds you had to beat just to be
here? And then for the next nine months,
that little egg cell is going to
multiply its DNA, repackage that DNA.
One cell becomes two, becomes four,
becomes eight, becomes 16, becomes 50
trillion cells over the course of nine
months. And you're multiplying egg cells
as a at a rate of 250,000
new cells per second.
per second, not per minute, per second.
You're this explosion and literally the
energy of the universe is what is
fueling all of this from happening. You
are nothing other than mass and energy
working together. And then there's you.
And it's like, how on earth can I have
mental health problems and not
acknowledge and have awe for what we
are? Oh my gosh. And that's what that
was the gift that stroke gave to my
life. And you can see I get a little
excited about it
>> a little. Yeah.
>> We are so beautiful. We are so
beautiful. We are perfect and whole and
beautiful just the way we are. And it's
like if we would become balanced as a
society, we would I truly believe truly
believe with every essence of my being
that our number one job is to love one
another. When we love one another and we
support one another and we encourage one
another, we all grow and we will benefit
as humanity. And when that happens, we
will really recognize we have fragile
resources on this planet and we need to
nurture the planet as a part of us
because we have a symbiotic relationship
with this planet.
Chokes me up.
>> Why? because it's
[sighs and gasps] you know lots of
conversations about are we going to make
it or are we not going to make it. What
is the future of humanity?
Where do we go? How do we how what
happens? We we live in a threat every
day of our exist of our uh you know
existence being completely blown apart.
Okay.
>> What are these?
>> I would like for you to put those on.
>> Okay.
>> Now.
Okay. And I just want you to sit in that
for like oh just uh you know 30 seconds
20 seconds. Actually it's pretty good
look on you there.
>> Minute black.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Okay. Now I would like
for you to pull your right one. The
little Do you see how it's got a little
little edge? Yeah. Yeah. Flip it up.
It'll flip up. Yeah. And flip it all the
way up. Now what you're doing right now
is you are bringing light in from the
lateral portion of your visual field.
What does that mean? Of that eye. So
close one eye and open. Leave one eye
open. Okay. That's a ball. Okay. Down
the middle is an artificial line.
>> Yeah.
>> Outside the outside portion that is
called lateral
>> and the inside side is called medial.
>> Okay. [clears throat]
>> And so the lateral light is now coming
in and that hits the the medial side of
your retina. Okay.
>> And the retina is the back of the
eyeball.
>> Okay. So, the light's coming in from the
the outside of my eye and it's hitting
the inside of my eye.
>> It's hitting the in it's coming out from
the outside of your visual field. It's
hitting the uh medial internal side of
your retina and then those fibers are
boom crossing over to the opposite
hemisphere.
>> Okay. I'll put a diagram on the screen
for anyone that's Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, right now you are purposely
stimulating your left hemisphere. So I
just want you to just how do you feel
inside of your body? Just describe a few
things to me. How do you feel
>> feeling analytical about anything? Think
about
>> my back has got a little bit of a pain
in it. Um but otherwise just very
focused on doing this job as the host of
the D of CEO.
>> Beautiful. Just focus which is what that
left hemisphere should do. So go ahead
and flip that down.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. And then just like stay for like
20 seconds and let everything kind of
equilibrate to whatever the darkness is
that's in there.
>> Yeah.
>> All right.
Okay. Go ahead then and pull up the
other side.
It's a good look. It's like a little
flag right there. Mhm.
>> Yeah. Okay.
How do you feel?
Weirdly I felt more relaxed.
>> Now or before?
>> No, now I feel more relaxed.
>> Your whole body just went calm.
>> Yeah.
>> What else? Tell me something more. Any
aches or pains in your body?
>> I just feel way more relaxed. I feel
like I'm laying low on a sun lounger.
>> Yeah, that's what the right brain feels
like. So you're bringing less
information in from that the light of
the lateral side of your visual field.
It's hitting the medial portion of your
retina and crossing into your right
hemisphere. So what you're doing right
now is you're sending light energy
photons into the right hemisphere and it
is pushing through. And now this is a an
easy easy way for people to control and
choose how they want to be between their
two hemispheres and really get to know
oh
>> how do I know this isn't just a placebo
like how do I because I said I do feel
way more relaxed like I can't be
bothered to carry on this
>> well if you look at the anatomy if you
look at the the anatomy this is where
light is coming in on the um you can't
really see it on here, but that's going
to be information from your eyeballs,
which would be sitting right here, right
there.
>> This is fibers. You're wired for this.
This is how you are wired. That's why
everything about you, this isn't about a
placebo having a behavioral impact. This
is about the anatomy of the brain.
>> Have they tested this in trials to see?
>> Oh, absolutely. In fact, they just did a
brand new one at Harvard um and and
showed it on fMRI.
Yeah. And um
>> have they done like a double blind
control trial where they they put these
glasses on and then ask people how they
feel?
>> Well, even more than that, they're doing
they're manipulating the light source in
different kinds of ways. I'm not
involved with that work, but I know that
Marty Tyer at Harvard as well as
Frederick Schiffer. Now, Frederick
Schiffer is a psychiatrist who has been
doing psychiatry at Harvard Medical
School for his whole career. and he
would use these types of of glasses with
his psychiatric patients and would show
the patient that there is a part of them
that is less well and one side that is
more ill. And so he would use the
relationship between these two different
characters, these two different
personalities to find more peace and
healing.
>> I feel very I it's weird. I felt I just
lifted up the right side again and put
the left side down and I immediately
felt well not immediately but it took a
little while to 20 seconds I felt
focused again.
>> Mhm.
>> Is that is that just placebo? Am I
>> No, that's what your why that's that's
why you can feel focus because of the
cells that you are now stimulating. In
the other hemisphere it's not about
focus. It doesn't care about focus. It
cares about the big picture and your
relationship to the big picture. So,
it's not like the brain is just this
soup of cells. These cells are very
specifically organized. Every ability
you have is because you have brain cells
that perform that function. And all
you're doing right now is preferentially
stimulating certain cells. It's kind of
like, okay, I'm going to stim I'm going
to open my eyes and I'm going to
experience vision. Well, that's not a
placebo. If I want to be able to
actively switch between these different
parts, these four personalities in my
brain so I can be most effective in a
given situation.
>> Yeah.
>> Is there a practice where where I can
control my brain in that way?
>> Absolutely. In your life, this is a
practice.
>> You don't just learn it and then go do
it. This is a practice. You got to say
to yourself, first step, step number
one, recognize in this moment, am I
using my leftinking judgment, listening
to this conversation, and what is my
judgment? Is my judgment, yes, this
makes sense. This is interesting. I want
more. Or is this, oh, this is just crap.
I just can't go there. I got to turn it
off. Or, okay, I'll give you an example.
Uh once you know who your four
characters are, once you have really
thought about them, studied about them,
paid attention to what your when they
come out in you, what they feel like
inside of your body. I can I can jump
between all four in an instant because I
know them so well.
>> But would you is there a practice you
have to say?
>> So this is what I do. So this is what I
do. Well, once you know the four of
them, and the only way to know them is
to practice with them, get to know them.
>> When do you get really unhappy? Who
unhappies you?
>> When do you want to growl at people?
>> I would name my name.
>> Don't name a name. But, you know, see,
you went straight into that character
too part of you. That's the only part of
you that holds grudges.
Your right thinking doesn't care about
that. It doesn't even know about that
because that's in the past.
So when so so here's the key. Step
number one, observe yourself. When am I
being a character? One, when am I at
work? When am I speaking and organizing
and making a to-do list and when do I
like to be the boss and when do I like
to control people, places, things, and
time and all of that? When am I doing
that? Well, you know that part of
yourself very well. He's probably called
Steven.
The part of you that is not very happy.
You know, your parents probably know
this part of you. Your girlfriend
definitely knows this part of you,
right?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. When are you playful? What does it
feel like? It feels completely different
than when you're at work or when you're
not happy. When are you at play? And if
you're not at play much, then you might
want to give yourself a little bit more
play. So, I was working with a group of
physicians because physicians are very
busy people. And right now, the
physician is a very high level of
suicide. So, I care passionately about
this population because they're not
finding any peace because society
expects them to be left thinking all the
time. They're supposed to be the
authority and they can't have any mental
health issues because they're the ones
we go to for mental health issues. So,
all they can do, they don't have time.
They are busy, busy, busy and they're
not very happy about it. And our system
is a mess. So, they're having to deal
with that. So I was working with a group
and I said, "Okay, I want you to take a
pair a chalk outside of the ER room and
I want you to draw a hopscotch." And
what happened was all these doctors in
and out and these medical professionals
were hopscotching in and hopscotching
out. And that just that helped them
bring their glee back just for a moment,
just for an instant. So, this is the
glee and it's exciting and it's fun and
it's like figure out what brings you joy
and do that and know and and and this is
why it really helps to know this because
if you're going to say, "Okay, I'm going
to go uh I'm going to go play
basketball. I come from Indiana.
Everybody plays basketball. I'm going to
go play basketball and I'm going to go
do it for 20 minutes and my character
one is over here saying, "We don't have
time for you to go shoot some hoops,
girl. We got business to take care of.
We're on a deadline." And little
character three comes in and says, "I
will refresh you. I will be your pause.
I will refuel your spirit. I take the
stress away from that subject. I release
I I have all kinds of endorphins and
excitement stuff going on. And then I go
back and I do such a more creative and
open job because I made space instead of
just the drive drive do linear linear
linear." The beauty of being a human is
you have all four parts of this brain.
This is our design. But we are
functioning with only one online as
conscious. Imagine.
Imagine if you could say in this instant
I want to um I want to I want to feel as
though just feel as though whatever your
spiritual beliefs or your beliefs about
a higher power whatever just call it the
universe because we know there's a bunch
of rocks spinning around in space and
we're on one of them hanging on for life
just being human right so that's all
happening. So, oh my gosh, I can say
thank you to all those rocks for being
in the positions they're in so that
we're still here and I can feel this
deep sense of gratitude and as soon as I
feel that gratitude and that awe, oh my
god, I existed all and it could be over
like that and then it's over, but right
now it's a party. Life can be play.
>> Did I ever tell you about the uh data
breach that we had at my previous
company?
>> Yeah, I remember hearing about that
>> which which um was a total nightmare.
So, I'm glad that we now use One
Password.
>> What actually is it, Steve?
>> It's called um One Password, and they're
the sponsor of the podcast now. And they
have this feature called Enterprise
Password Manager, which means that if
any of our passwords across the team are
compromised or leaked, then it notifies
us. And obviously, if that were to be
the case, we're at huge risk across the
entire team. Through one password EPM,
you can also store all of your sensitive
information. and it's helping us to move
closer towards pass keys, which means
eventually everybody will be able to log
in to pretty much everything without
ever having to put a password in.
>> Sounds like a good addition.
>> Yeah, I think it's like the single most
impactful security addition you can make
to your team, especially if your team
has tons of passwords that are all like
hidden in Excel files and stuff. To my
listeners, if you want to secure your
business, head to onepass.com/doac.
One password is a game changer. It's the
future that I always wished would be the
case as someone that has, you know, 20
30 different passwords for 2030
different applications. In my second
book, The Diary of a CEO, 33 Laws of
Business and Life, one of the laws I
talk about is always prioritizing your
first foundation. And by that, I mean
your health. After speaking to hundreds
of scientists and doctors and thinkers,
I'm convinced we can all change the
trajectory of our long-term health
through the daily actions that we take.
So, for me, partnering with our new
sponsor, Function Health, made complete
sense. Their membership includes over a
100 advanced lab tests covering
hormones, toxins, inflammation, heart
health, stress, and more. And when you
sign up, you schedule your tests,
complete them, then you're sent a
personalized summary with insights
backed by doctors and thousands of hours
of research. And if anything critical
shows up, you'll get a call from a
doctor. These are the insights most
people never get, but you can get them
now. So, if you want to learn more, head
to functionhealth.com/doac
where you can sign up right now. And for
the first thousand of my listeners, you
can get $100 credit towards your
membership when you use the code DOAC
100. But do not tell anybody. That's
DOAC110.
>> How long do you think emotions are
supposed to last?
>> 90 seconds. From the moment you think a
thought, we're only doing three things
inside of our brain at any moment in
time. We think thoughts, we feel
emotions, and we run physiological loops
to what we're thinking and feeling. So,
let's say I'm going to think a thought
like you did. I said, "Uh, think of
somebody you're not happy with." And you
went and you thought about it and then
you felt it and we could see it in your
body. So, you thought the thought, "Oh,
that's the person. I'm mad at them." And
then it's like, "Oh, I'm really mad at
them." You could see you feel I'm really
mad at them. And then you either act on
it or you don't act on it. But if you
simply observe it, it will loop right
through just like a a muscle reflex.
It's an a emotional reflex. less than 90
seconds, which means, and everybody's
saying, "Oh, I can stay mad for a whole
lot longer than 90 seconds." But what
you're doing then is you're rethinking
the thoughts. That's restimulating the
emotional loop, restimulating the
physiological response and and it just
goes on forever.
>> When you feel that emotion, is there a
way to is there a strategy for making
sure that you don't act upon it or you
don't reloop?
>> Well, I enjoy it.
>> You enjoy the emotion?
>> I enjoy it.
>> Even if you're angry.
>> Even if I'm angry. Thank God I'm
capable. I am wired to be mad. I am
wired to be angry. I'm wired to push
things away and say that is not okay. I
get big. I get ugly. I get I make myself
heard because that's a healthy boundary
I'm going to establish. So I celebrate
the fact that I'm capable of anger. I I
love that I can be sad. I'm glad that I
can grieve. Oh my god. Grief is this
powerful emotion that can consume us,
totally envelop us, take us to our
knees. And it's like it's like I have a
friend right now who's about ready to
pass away. Beautiful, beautiful person.
She's been great. Wonderful friend in my
life. I love her. And I will celebrate
every time the wave of emotion hits me
because that's how much I loved her.
That's how much I loved her. I
celebrate. I'm capable of being taken to
the floor in that kind of pain and just
weep my whole soul. I mean, I'm wired
for this. This is life. Why do I want to
just put myself in a little box and say,
"I don't want to have grief. I don't
want to have pain. I don't want to be
mad. I don't want to do this. I want to
be I want to be a robot. I don't want to
be a robot. I want to be a whole human
with a whole brain. I want all of it.
It's delicious. Oh my gosh. And it lasts
this long and then it's gone.
Thank you.
And I'm guessing your headache feels a
little better.
>> Why did you say thank you?
>> Because it's so rare that people will
really connect with another human being
for anything more than like three
seconds and then I'm uncomfortable and I
can't do that anymore. But we're here to
love one another. You're the gift of my
life. People on this planet are the gift
of my life. We are the gift of your
life. And if we are constantly judging
each other negatively and pushing each
other away and killing each other, we
are violent against each other. And it's
like, oh my gosh, we are so off track of
what we could be as whole breed living.
I truly believe the next step for our
evolution
is waking up the whole brain. And if we
wake up our whole brain, the game is
changed. And that becomes no. It's not
okay for us to create war. It is not
okay for us to create hate. It is not
okay for us to make that division
anymore. That is not what we we respect
and that is not what we want as
humanity. We want to be whole. We want
to be the next level. We want to feel
safe with each other.
>> Are you hopeful?
>> Completely 100%.
That doesn't mean
we couldn't be gone in an instant. But
absolutely. That's the beauty of the
right hemisphere is it is hope. It's
possibility. And that's why when you
talk to me about AI, yes, I think a lot
about AI. AI is uh wow. I listen to your
podcast. There's a whole lot of wow and
I don't have that. And this is why
>> sensory,
>> you know, it's hard. It's hard. You've
had some really difficult conversations
about, you know, the reality of of the
potential dangers. But here's why that
doesn't bother me. Because I have a
whole brain. And my whole brain says,
"Yes, that is that and that is going on
and that is scary." And I think about it
through the the perspective of a
neuroanatomist. So I see the internet as
like this higher level of consciousness
that we're feeding ourselves into and
everybody's plugged in. And now we're
creating robots and consciousnesses that
we'll think independent of us. So we're
essentially creating an other that we
cannot control. Well, I can't control
who's got those nuclear codes.
So from my perspective, I'm just glad I
wake up every day and it's like, oh, I
get another great day and it's like,
woo, possibilities. So,
>> have you always been like this?
[laughter]
>> No, this is this is really came with a
stroke. This so much came with a stroke
because I lost all of the box. I lost
the box.
>> The box.
>> The box of thinking this is right. This
is wrong. This is the way we're going to
do it. Uh, I value money. I was climbing
the Harvard ladder. Uh, you know, I was
a little girl from Indiana. I was
climbing the Harvard ladder. I mean,
that was pretty big deal to a little
girl in her family. And so, so I was
climbing the Harvard ladder. And then
bam, that was all gone. And when that
was all gone, what I gained was
[sighs]
[snorts] connection, heart, time,
possibility. I my business perspective
has shifted in that I don't reach out to
people. I don't solicit. I don't hustle.
I don't need to because if I'm working,
great. I love to work. I love my work.
It's yummy. I mean, it's like, how can I
not? But I love to paddle board. I live
half of a life, half my time on a boat
out in a beautiful cove pretty much in
isolation with the bear and the deer and
the fish and the bobcat. I live in
nature. I live the life I want to live
and then I get off the boat and I come
and visit people and we talk or I go and
I do whatever it is I'm doing.
>> Had you not had the stroke, how
different do you think your life would
look? Oh, I'd be probably a professor of
neuroanatomy at Harvard Medical School,
teaching and performing research, doing
that thing. That was my dream.
>> Do you think you'd be happier or less
happy?
>> Oh, no. I'm so glad I had that stroke. I
am so glad I had the stroke. It set me
free. It set me free. Having the stroke
set me free from having to live a life
based on other people's expectations
about what my life should be
>> because it changed something in your
brain.
>> Because that went totally offline and it
wasn't going to be a choice anymore.
>> Is it still offline?
>> No.
>> So it went offline which allowed you to
focus on other things. Think about the
brain and think about your consciousness
and think about you have four parts of
you and all four parts are always
running and they're kind of vying for
the microphone. Who's going to talk in
this moment, right? Who's going to think
what? Who's going to perform what? Who's
going to do what? So, we have these
these whole brains and um and then
imagine that you lose your business
sense. You lose that guy. Character one.
>> Character one falls off the planet
>> which is the facts, factual part, the
working part. So that would leave me
with just the sort of emotional part and
the present part and the wisdom.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> So do you miss it? Well, it's gone. Your
ego has pretty much dissolved because
that's a part of it.
>> So, but you might be angry. You might be
angry because I was doing so well and I
was living a life and I liked those
facts and d I wanted to do more business
and I wanted to do more businesses and I
I and you are that guy. I mean you are
so diverse in your business. You are so
good at being character one. But let's
say he goes offline. What do you have
left? So my character went offline.
Would you still value? Would you have
value? What value would you have if you
weren't him? Tell me.
>> [snorts]
>> I think my girlfriend would appreciate
me still. My dog would probably
appreciate me
>> maybe more because you probably spend a
little more time with it.
>> Yeah, probably. Yeah, my girlfriend
would definitely appreciate me more.
>> Mhm.
Mhm. Because you'd have time. You
wouldn't be running that wheel.
You'd be a different part of you. And
then if you can master and help heal
your pain from the past or your
disgruntled self that well, you know, I
had this problem and now I can't use my
left arm and so I'm going to be a
miserable human being the rest of my
life because my left arm doesn't work
anymore.
>> How do we do that? How do we heal our
trauma from the past from a neurological
perspective?
>> Well, I think what we do is we recognize
first of all um the question everybody
wants to heal it. So the way to heal it
is not to get rid of it. I cannot get
rid of my trauma from the past. My pain
from the past is real and it is mine and
it is expansive and it is mine and
everybody has their pain from the past,
their trauma. We all have trauma. So
what do I do with that trauma? Do I let
that trauma just fester in that
character two part of my brain and then
I just look at everyone else who's not
like me now and say, "Well, you didn't
have any trauma. You know, you're better
off than I am." You know, I start making
a negative, hostile judgment about,
"Well, this is my trauma and I want to
protect it." The purpose of trauma is to
say to you, you're a biological
creature. You're in the present moment.
You're a real human being. You have a
life. my life, part of my life is my
trauma. And I will bounce from trauma to
trauma to trauma to trauma. And if I
look at the trauma and say, "This is a
horrible thing." Well, maybe it was a
horrible thing. And maybe that was 30
years ago and that was a horrible thing.
And you're keep the more you think about
it and you root into it. And the more
often we run a circuit, the more of that
circus, stronger that gets and begins to
run on automatic. And so now I'm always
worrying about, oh my god, am I going to
have more trauma? and I put all my
energy into that trauma. Well, what am I
doing? It's just the same as if I'm just
a workaholic and doing nothing but
character one. And and so the power of
whole brain living is to know that I I
have four parts of me. And that trauma
is important information. And let's say
I I I was attacked or I was raped or I
was I had a horrible experience with a
person. And now in the future whenever I
see a person that looks remotely like
that I kneejerk away from that because I
perceive myself from my drama that
that's not safe. So I push it away. That
is an appropriate response. But then I
say, "Oh, but this is actually a
different person." And I can open up my
right hemisphere and with curiosity look
at this new person and say, "Well, you
might look like somebody who hurt me
many years ago, but you're not that
person. Who are you?" and make a
connection in the present. So the trauma
is supposed to be information. We get in
trouble when we turn it into a
lifestyle.
So how do I heal that? I acknowledge it.
I value it. I say thank you to it. I
acknowledge its its purpose and I pull
my energy into the other parts of my
brain. My character four, Queen Toad,
can come in and self soothe me and hold
me.
>> And what would character 4 say to the
trauma?
>> You're loved. You're okay. Thank you.
Thank you for this information.
Thank you. And hold it. Well, trauma
needs to be heard. Needs to be held and
it needs to be heard. And and then it
can like transform itself into into the
next level of, oh, okay, I'm okay. Even
though I had that trauma, even though I
I had this stroke that all but killed
me, I'm not resentful. Why would I be
resentful? It's my life. This happened
to be the life story of me. We all have
a life story. So the question is, how
much energy am I going to put into that
and hold myself back when I have all
these other incredible possibilities?
And if I was hurt or I was raped, then I
can actually if I want to take that
anger because I matter than hell about
it, then I can I can advocate for other
people to help women get self-defense
courses so that we can actually protect
ourselves. I mean, I can turn it into
something else. I can make lemonade out
of lemons. We all can. We're wired for
that. You've talked a lot about how you
think about the brain from a cellular
perspective and how we keep it healthy
from a cellular perspective. So I wanted
to get some of your advice on lifestyle
choices that I should be making to have
an optimally healthy brain at the
cellular level.
>> Number one, sleep. Sleep is everything.
Sleep, sleep, sleep. These are
billions, 800 billion
cells that are eating and creating waste
for you to have a consciousness in every
instant. Imagine the number of cells it
takes for you to just look at me and
have a relationship in this moment with
me. I mean, your brain is working hard.
So, it's eating, it's creating waste. Go
to sleep. Sleep should be a priority.
And if you sleep then the micro ga can
come out and then all the garbage and
waste can get cleaned up. The waste gets
pushed away and you wake up crisp and
fresh the next day because your brain
cells have been taken care of. What are
you feeding them? If you are feeding
them preservatives, you are preserving
them. Oh my gosh. Pay attention to what
you're consuming. Fresh fruits, fresh
vegetables.
try to do it if you know I know we exist
in a world where not everybody can eat
organic but boy pesticides are poison.
So paying attention to what we are
consuming. How much sugar are we eating?
Sugar. Sugar is just not a healthy
choice
no matter what. Now I love chocolate and
I'm going to eat chocolate. It's my, you
know, vice. I'm going to do it anyway.
Dark chocolate. It's a bean. It's a
vegetable.
Somebody said that to me once and I
believed him. Okay, so um what are you
eating? Movement. You have to move your
body. You are an organism. So many of us
think that especially if we're in that
character one left thinking brain. My
body is designed to like move my left my
brain around. No, you are an organism.
So finding ways to get yourself into the
different characters is great for you.
If you can't get into your body, name
for me a song if you would that as soon
as you start in on it, your body goes.
What gets your beat going?
>> Give me one.
>> Why did I think of gigs walking the
hardest? Um Um
>> then do it.
>> No, I can't I can't do it.
>> Yes, you can do it.
>> It was No, it was I was thinking of cuz
it was playing outside before we started
recording. I was thinking of Olivia
Dean's new song, Man I Need, but I can't
sit here and sing Man I Need. And then
the little
>> Well, then don't sing it. Just give. So
for me, she's like
>> Exactly. Yeah.
>> Yeah. But that was forced. Now, can you
do it like you mean it?
>> We ought to put the glasses back on you
and see what happens. Okay. For me, I'm
disco era.
I want some hot stuff, baby. This I
cannot not do this. I become my body.
All of me. It's like dance like nobody's
watching. That's what character 3 is all
about.
>> So why is that important for a healthy
brain at a cellular level?
>> Oh my gosh. It's the break. It's the
pause. It's the fun. It's the joy. It's
the present moment connection. What is
my life going to be like if I don't have
any of those things I just listed?
>> So exercise, quality sleep, nutrition,
>> hydration.
>> Hydration.
>> Why is that so important?
>> Oh my god. Your body is nothing but
cells connected to one another. And
cells are filled with water and the
space between them is filled with water.
And it's a delicate balance of what what
atoms and molecules are inside the cells
versus outside the cells. But you're
just a big liquid ball.
>> Excuse me.
>> Yes, you are. I said it and I meant it.
That's what you are. You are a fleshy
ball of you. That's it. Water. You need
to be hydrated. Now, you can't
overhydrate. If we overhydrate then
we're we're distilling
uh what's going on in those populations
of in the cell or extracellular matrix.
So don't just you know drink your weight
in water every day but you have to stay
hydrated.
>> What about learning? Is it good for the
brain or
>> Oh yes. Yeah. It's it's wonderful. When
I learn let's say I'm going to learn to
do a sport.
>> Yeah.
>> So uh and let's say that sport's going
to be uh tennis.
>> Yeah. And so I'm going to go to my
character one. And character one is
going to say, "Okay, this is how you
hold the racket." And um and this is how
you hold your body and this is where how
you're going to swing that. And try
that. And so left hemisphere comes in
and gives you the plan and it gives you
the details and you you do that. And
then uh at some point you've done it
enough that now you're just going to
start whacking a ball, right? Whacking a
ball. And you're going to practice it
over and over again. And then it gets
like really fun. And then it's back in
your body and now we're back to girls
just want to have fun, you know? I mean,
we're back into character three.
>> Well, we know alcohol's bad.
>> Well, you're drunk because your cells
are drunk. I mean, just think about it.
If I'm going to consume alcohol, it's
going to suck the water out of those
cells. They're going to de they're going
to be dehydrated and I'm going to end up
with a headache. And when they get
fragile because the membrane has been
drunk, drunk, drunk, drunk, you know,
abused, abused, abused, eventually they
tend to cremate and blow up and that's
the end of those cells. So alcohol is
not good. Addiction is um you know, we
exist in a society and and I think that
this is important. We exist in a society
where the left hemisphere, especially
character 2, where our cravings and
addictions are. Is if I'm not happy
because I'm not living a fulfilled life
because I'm on YouTube or I'm watching
social media and all these people are
getting all these clicks and I'm not
living this lavish life that these other
people are living and I'm down on me and
I'm just like not very happy. I'm going
to make poor choices because that is
what that part of us is designed to do.
So I say take responsibility for the
energy you bring into a room. And if you
pay attention to who walks in and what
part of you walks in and you come in as
a whole person, now I am completely
available to master the moment, whatever
the moment is.
>> Dr. Jill Balty Taylor, uh
>> oh,
>> if you if you had a closing message for
my audience, something that maybe maybe
we've a subject we've missed.
>> Yeah.
>> Or something that you think is the most
important thing to close upon, what
would it be? Your life is worth 30
seconds.
If you're in your car and you're getting
ready to pull out between those two cars
that are coming, your life is worth 30
seconds. Take a breath. Take a pause and
save your own life. It has changed my
life. As soon as somebody said to me,
Jill, isn't your worth your life worth
tw 30 seconds? And I thought to myself,
oh my gosh, actually it is.
>> And what does that mean? It means just
relax. It means I'm not going to try to
squeeze myself into boxes where I maybe
don't fit or belong.
I'm going to pause
physically. I'm talking about physical.
Physical. So, seriously, if you're
driving,
>> okay, so you're saying slow down.
>> Slow down. 30 seconds. Your life is
worth 30 seconds. Be conscious about it.
>> Thank you. Very fascinating. Incredibly
fascinating. You have a remarkable
energy and you have a wonderful way of
reminding me of the I guess
transitioning me from the uh the working
factual part of my brain to being more
present in the moment. And I imagine
you've done that for everybody that's
listened today. There's a real puress to
you that I wonder if many of us might
have just lost along the way somehow.
So, thank you so much for being who you
are and your your journeys are
unbelievably incredible, unbelievably
inspiring. And the fact that you've
you've been so centered on gratitude and
an appreciation for life despite
all that you've been through is a
remarkable thing. We have a closing
tradition on this podcast with the
Alaska leaves a question for the next
not knowing who it's for. And the
question left for you
is what do you do when your life doesn't
turn out the way that you had hoped?
>> I thank the universe that option wasn't
for me.
Next.
So easy.
So easy. Thank you to that right
hemisphere consciousness that connected
to the universe with all those atoms and
molecules and big old rocks floating
around that that wasn't meant for me.
Something better is on its way or I'm
going to go paddle board. I'm perfectly
good with that.
>> Thank you so much. Thank you.
[music]
>> If there's anything we need, it is
connection. Especially in the world
we're living in today. And that is
exactly why we created these
conversation cards. Because on this
show, when I sit here with my guest and
have those deep, intimate conversations,
this remarkable thing happens time and
time again. We feel deeply connected to
each other. At the end of every episode,
the guest I'm interviewing leaves a
question for the next guest, and we've
turned them into these conversation
cards. And we've added these twist cards
to make your conversations even more
interesting. And there are so many more
twists along the way with the
conversation cards. This is the brand
new edition. And for the first time
ever, I've added to the pack this gold
card, which is an exclusive question
from me, but I'm only putting the gold
cards in the first run of conversation
cards. So, if you want them, join the
wait list now and you'll get early
access when they get released. Head to
the link in the description below.
[music]
[singing]
>> [music]